The Rise and Fail of Facebook
=============================

:date: 2009-06-10
:tags: facebook, myspace

A recent `Lifehacker story`_ about a Greasemonkey script to remove quiz stuff from Facebook_ made me 
realise something: *you know your site is too "web 2.0" when users are going out of their way to 
remove features.* A quick `search on Userscripts.org`_ reveals that a substantial proportion of the 
Facebook-related scripts are either for removing features or auto-playing game applications.

I feel that Facebook started off pretty well.  The initial target audience seemed to be students, 
and that's what most of the users were.  It was friendly and uncluttered, compared to other social 
networking sites like MySpace.  This spread to a wider audience, first sucking in kids and then 
adults.  This was less than ideal for some, the idea of their parents on a social networking site 
being horrifying, but still not a disaster.

But in the midst of all this, the apocalypse happened: a powerful API which allowed other people to 
extend the functionality of Facebook by creating applications that people could add to their 
account.  Gradually users became inundated with an unstoppable torrent of application requests, 
caused by application developers making the "tell all your friends" step seem (or be) necessary to 
using their application.  The average user's profile became a mess of applications competing for 
screen space.  The target audience became those who have the time to play endless Flash games, 
answer endless quizzes, and generally clutter the "requests" page of their friends.

And so Facebook became MySpace_ 2.0---gaudy and cluttered, with infinite ability to add more 
clutter.  Maybe the lesson learned is that the moment you allow anything "shiny" in a social 
networking site, your demographic will degenerate to schoolkids who want to fill their profiles with 
as much of it as possible.

Personally, I've reduced my Facebook interaction for the past 2 years to having the site email me 
when anybody says something directly to me either via message or on my "wall".  There is just too 
much clutter now for me to wade through the endless application requests, friend requests from 
people I don't know, and news feed items generated by the latest viral quiz.  And maybe pictures of 
friends getting drunk have lost their novelty value...

.. _Lifehacker story: http://lifehacker.com/5284511/facebook-purity-removes-eye+gouging-quiz-updates
.. _Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/
.. _search on Userscripts.org: http://userscripts.org/scripts/search?q=facebook&amp;sort=rating
.. _MySpace: http://myspace.com/
